Thank you, friends. Thank you. Good to see you. Yay. Once again, we did it. We made it. We're
still breathing. We still have an opportunity to have Dharma awaken in our hearts and that
kind of sparkle alive in our minds. So here we are again, really. It's a truly precious
time to have this opportunity and to actually seize it, this Dharma. So what we do, as we
always do, is awaken our own sizzling Buddha nature in these three ways. The first is generating
this mind of joy and gratitude. We really brighten our awareness. So this is called
renunciation. We soften our hearts. We become gentle and receptive to being natural to the
nature, to the Dharma. And so this is renunciation or joy and appreciation. So really turn that
on. There's so many reasons we have to be really appreciative and very thankful for this
opportunity
right now. We have so much going for us. So then really connect to that. You could simply
call that gratitude. So really try to turn on that gratitude. And then secondly, always
this bodhicitta, which is just the heart essence of everything the Buddha taught, bodhicitta,
the heart mind of enlightenment. So we try to really reaffirm that view and the commitment
that why are we here kind of thinking of the Dharma, reflecting on the Dharma, practicing
the Dharma with this Dhujum Teresarnandra sadhana. It's really genuinely so that I can
become enlightened, free of every single way that I kind of just create this whole problem
for myself and get in all these cycles of suffering. So I will be free of all that.
And why? To help every single being awaken their own true nature and also be free and
enlightened. Like that's the motivation we're trying to arouse is bodhicitta. It's the deepest,
most profound motivation possible. And all of all the universes is bodhicitta that every
single being is free from suffering and the causes of suffering. And in order for that
to happen, I take the responsibility of having to wake up myself so that I can actually help
beings do that, become a support for beings to just be themselves, have their own Buddha
nature fully awaken. This is so kind of unspeakably important. And then thirdly, this pure
perception,
this is Dhujum Teresarnandras of Asriyana practice. This is Tibetan Buddhist practice.
So we're kind of at least for this time, we're like kind of turning on this pure view, we're
kind of more generally called devotion, kind of really trying to see this sacredness of
our experience right now. The sacredness of the things that we see, the kind of sacredness
of any kind of things we hear, the sacredness of any movements of mind, this form, sound,
space, we're trying to really connect to that. First, we connect to our Buddha nature. And
from there, then everything we see here in the movement of mind is seen as a natural
expression of the Buddha nature, enlightened energy or enlightened display. So in this
kind of more general sense of pure perception, talking about it very generally. So then we
kind of awaken these three aspects of our own natural, this natural capacity of our
heart and our mind, gratitude, joy and appreciation. And then bodhicitta, the awakened heart mind
of enlightenment. And then pure perception, seeing everything is innately perfectly good
already. Let me do that now.
So the topic for this kind of brief time of reflection today, I think in general is just
about settling down. Kind of the official kind of more topic title is slow and steady by
leaps and bounds, slow and steady by leaps and bounds, slow and steady. I thought really
just to kind of like take a pause in a way just to settle and really reflect and kind
of really connect to what we already have going for us, specifically as students, as
like practitioners of Buddha Dharma, following in the footsteps of the Buddha Shakyamuni,
Guru Padmasambhava and these lineage masters. Just to really kind of pause with that, like
deep wealth of practices and teachings we've received. And even if we're really new to
the Dharma, it's like a single line of Dharma by the Buddha or Guru Rinpoche. It goes all
the way to enlightenment. It's a complete, it's like an inexhaustible treasure trove,
even a single line of Dharma. So we have this richness. We already enjoy it. And some of
us have been doing this for years. And then years and years build up and the hair gets
grayer and the hearing gets less and everything keeps changing around and the bodies get kind
of weaker, friends start going, family members start going, leaving our sight. So I thought
this is kind of a moment to just pause a little bit and like settle down. It's slow and steady.
I mean, so much of our time now is kind of this cultural kind of flow that we, so many
of us seem to be in, is always moving. Go, go, go, go, go. There's so many new things,
so much and so much to know. So many new ways we have to show up. And Dharma too, there's
so much Dharma out there on the internet and around in the world. There's so much Dharma
is a really extraordinary, it's a very rare time to have the Dharma be so accessible.
But we can get in this habit, which is just being a sentient being. It's a sentient habit,
roa, we wonder, leapfrog, one teaching, next teaching, next teaching, next teaching, one
practice. Oh, we'd be with the practice for a little bit. And then we get bored with it
and probably not that long. Then we try to get another practice where with one teacher,
all these teachers, all these zap me, so powerful, so amazing, you know, and then it kind of wears
off a little bit because we can't always get zapped. It's really hard to be that fresh.
It's like traveling to a new country. Of course, we go to a new country, go to a new place,
new currency, new food, new people, new language, and it's foreign. We don't know it, so we
have to be fresh because it's unknown. But we can't just travel to a new place all the
time. This becomes really dislocated, really exhausting, really confusing, really just
tiring. And it also makes our minds very superficial. Something really obvious has to slam us over
the head as being new. Whoa, this is so unusual, you know. And so much of the subtlety of reality
of the Dharma, of ourselves, of our intelligence, of our heart, of our quality of love, we just
overlook it. Everything has to be so loud, so obvious, so shocking. And this becomes
a habit, a habit to just wonder, wonder, wonder, move, move, move, move. And this is just a
sentient being habit, this drowa, it's literally the definition of sentient, sentient being.
Wonder, a wanderer. We just have to settle, at a certain point have to settle, at least
try, see what it's like to like put some roots somewhere and just be like, what is this like
to just stay put here for a while? Stay put on my cushion or just, I'm going to stay put
in a relationship, stay put, just looking at my mind for a while. What's my mind like?
Look genuinely, what's going on with me? Actually look. So Buddhism, we stop, we basically is
like in one way practice of non-doing. We just stay put, don't do anything for a while,
see what happens, because everything keeps moving. But if we don't stay put for a while,
we just going to constantly at the end, it's so sad. In the end, we didn't actually make
friends with ourselves. We didn't stop and be like, who am I? What's going on? What is
my mind like? What is my heart like? What do I really love? What am I scared of? And
with our relationships, so much of this word that keeps coming to my mind is depth, depth,
the deep, profound, the Dharma is so profound and our nature is so profound. And we just
need, we need one way in that suits my mind, an avenue in that really makes my mind fresh.
But the thing is, is that initial impulse or the initial shock or the newness, the freshness
that was from outside, it was so new. Whoa, I couldn't help but being fresh, it's new.
But then I have to take that same thing, and I have to approach it freshly. In the end,
the Dharma becomes about us on me, my mind. Because if I just keep changing things outside,
rearrange everything, new furniture, new place, new partner, new this, new job, new all this,
in some degree, we need to change things. That's okay, whatever. But if it becomes a
habit, because we're basically just bored. And one way we can look at that differently,
we're just it's too scary to go deep. So be always on the surface, surface, surface, surface.
Really obvious, really tangible. And say that's a quality of degenerate age, everything has
to be so tangible. All the subtleties we get, we don't pay attention to all the subtle layers.
The depth is lost. So what's like the most essential teaching in Buddhism? Refuge. Go
for refuge in Buddha, Dharma, Sangha. It's the essence. But then we can think, Oh, I've
been practicing for 20 years, 30 years, whatever refuge, that's like so beginner, you know.
And this kind of talk, that kind of that kind of thinking makes these wisdom beings just
cry. So sad. It's everything, refuge is everything. If we did, if we overlook refuge. It's so sad,
because I say that for my own self, because it's so easy to overlook, so easy to get in
the habit of one something big, big, loud, bright, big, some secret thing, you know,
only a few people can go. I'm one of the few people look at me, I'm so special, you know,
or I've done so many things, I counted so many numbers of the practice and all that.
It just becomes all about me again. It's the same old thing. Me, me, me, me, me. It's the
same thing, you know. And it's so sad. So settling. 갑어서 어는 있을 마치, so many times
to settle.
Refuge is essentially about finally settling. We have confidence in a path. What's the
primary condition of awakening? Buddha nature. My mind is a hundred percent good. Your mind
is a hundred percent perfect, a hundred percent. There's nothing wrong with your mind or your
heart. It's a hundred percent perfect. But they say, Rinpoche say, it's not enough. We
need the supportive conditions for that principle cause of our Buddha nature to fully awaken.
And they say the main supportive conditions are Buddha, Dharma, Sangha. And there's so
many ways to unpack Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, the three jewels, the refuge. And Rinpoche is
just illuminating the path of their book on the commentary on the 갑어서 갑어는
teaching. Illuminating the path. This goes in through the refuge section, all the sections
of the 갑어서 갑어서 갑어는, but their section on refuge is so beautiful. I
mean they're so, I like have all these quotes pulled out and all these things can kind of
repeat, but that's also kind of in one way. It's not really tired. It's more like, it's
like kind of scared that the Dharma becomes just another entertainment. Another, need
another zap, you know. Another teacher has to like twist it and like kind of not, not
change it, but just like, oh, do all this effort to make us turn on and show up. And
I think that's a one way. It's a little scary because then we're starting to, if we, if
we're in that experience and we require the teacher to do all the work, they have to make
us lean in and pay attention. Then the, it's kind of an inverted thing, you know. The Dharma
is the valuable thing that we need to actually be really curious about. The Dharma is not
trying to bend over backwards to make us curious. Like it's our job as practitioners, as students
to like, like actually kind of open that in ourselves. Otherwise we're just like a little
kid all the time, mommy, daddy, to make me, give me the thing, you know. I mean, I don't
mean to say it sound too harsh, but it's kind of true. Just like, give me, give me, I want
this now, give me. It's so sad. But this is like such a rare little window. We have this
beautiful temple. We have these living teachers. We have this Dharma, this stacks of Dharma
books, the internet. You can look up an infinite Dharma on the internet, all these YouTube videos,
all these podcasts. And then what happens? I can't find five minutes in my day to practice.
That's a big problem. So we wonder, wonder, wonder. And then at the end we're like, what
did I, it's like sand through the hands. Like what did I do in the end? I'm really tired
and there's a lot of complaints about what's wrong with everything in the world. Her and
him and this and the place and this and that. And then we're just tired, but we didn't find
any time to do what we knew was most important. To awaken my heart, to be kind, to be a loving
person, to be a genuinely like caring person, a good person. Someone comes to me and they
need help. And I like, I'm like right there, like how can I help? What's going on? You
know, to really be a good person. And at the same time, really light touch. Because there's
going to be so much tragedy in life. It's the truth of suffering. It's just endless suffering.
In my own mind, every moment, suffering, everything we experience suffering, there's always, even
if it's the best thing, it's only temporarily there. And then it changes and dissolves.
There's always this heartbreak in that we can't, we can't have it. We can't have even
these beautiful things. They just keep changing and leaving. There's always this suffering.
So we also need to see through this to see our, of course, we're talking about a Buddha
nature here, to see our own nature, our own goodness. And part of that is the absolute
unchanging aspect of our nature, the ultimate refuge, right? Absolute Gurumbhache, but the
absolute Buddha Dharmasanga, the unchanging quality of our awareness. So this is also
talked about as the illusory nature of experience. Then we need to be more and more familiar
with this. One, we show up with so much care and kindness. Because we're genuinely like
really connected. We feel a genuine interest, but at the same time, it's just always changing.
And if we forget the unchanging aspect of awareness, of experience, then we're going
to constantly just be heartbroken. Life will just rip our heart out again and again and
again. If we only see the suffering of conditioned existence, but we don't realize the cessation
of suffering, or we don't see the absolute nature of the suffering, the emptiness, then
this path is going to just be in one way brutal because the Buddha didn't just teach the first
noble truth. There's always, he taught the cessation and the path, and we need a path.
The path is the supportive condition for our own primary principle cause, the Buddha nature
to fully awaken. And then the foundational level of Buddha's teaching that goes all the
way through all the most secret, esoteric, profound, ultimate teachings is refuge. Refuge
in Buddha dharmasanga. And illuminating the path, Ramaiches go through it, the outer refuge,
inner refuge, secret refuge, ultimate or most secret refuge. And we've heard this. For many
of us, we've heard these teachings so much. The three jewels are the outer refuge. The
three roots, Guru, Deva, Dakini, are the inner refuge. The secret refuge, saa, long, tigle,
you know? Channels, winds, vital essence. The most secret or ultimate refuge is three kyas,
dharma kya, sambhoga kya, nirmana kya. The nature of the rigpa is all that. We've heard
all this, the essence in nature and responsiveness. But is it alive in my mind? Is refuge really
alive in this moment? Am I going for refuge or do I have to just stand up and do a prostration
and prove to someone I'm doing refuge? Cause if it's not alive in my mind, then I definitely
need to stand up and do a prostration. And I definitely, me personally, need to do so
many more prostrations. So many. So I don't know. I mean, I have all these notes and books
and things. And really, I mean, it's kind of just, you know, we're so fortunate. Three
jewels, three roots, three kyas. We have everything we need. We have everything, everything we
need. And the clock is ticking. And then it's going to just continue. And we don't know
what's next after this body stops. I don't know what's next for me, but this is so good
for me right now. I have such a good setup to practice dharma. Then I say, what's the
dharma? Right. We can do some quotes too. It's all good. In this walking in the footsteps
of the Buddha by the Kimbal Ramachis, 18, page 18, our own mind is the primary target
of dharma practice. Of course, we have to study and understand the teachings, but the
point isn't just to be able to recite something. The dharma has to be absorbed into our hearts
and minds. Dharma isn't a show or some kind of announcement or proclamation. Of course,
we may occasionally announce and show the dharma, but the essence of dharma is practice
and absorbing the teachings into our hearts and minds. Let your mind become gentler. Let
it be more peaceful and more joyful. Let your mind be full of love, kindness, patience and
understanding. Don't let your mind be restricted by clinging to ego or negative emotions. Don't
let it be carried away by skepticism, doubt, hesitation, intellectual ideas, or traditions.
This doesn't mean we can't have traditions or these other things, but when we're practicing
the dharma, let them dissolve. Let them vanish within the space of the Dharma Dattu and bring
forth the genuine, open, calm state of mind and relax. Just be in that state. Let joy,
peace and appreciation arise very naturally like rainbow light or like the mist of springtime.
Keep this view all the time with the joy of sunlight in your heart and mind. That is known
as practicing the dharma. Really try and focus your mind with mindfulness, joy and alertness,
always trying to bring forth those qualities as much as you can. And then this is the dharma.
I mean, this is our mind. This is the nature of our mind and its qualities shine forth
as love, compassion, wisdom, patience, kindness, forgiveness, energy, enthusiastic energy,
to really serve beings, to serve the teachings. Not to have beings serve me or have the teachings
serve me, but to really genuinely love, you know, like really deeply love, you know, like
deep love, not just surface love, not just conditional love. You give me what I want
and then I'll be nice. But deep love that comes from Buddha nature, like it's not love
because something happened. It's just love because that's the nature. It's just love.
The mind, the heart, it just cares. It just includes. It's naturally compassionate. All
these, there's so many teachings, the renunciation. There's so many, there's all these gems of
nuggets of teachings, page 30, the same book. Renunciation, which often kind of seems like
a bad news. I lose the good things or something. But renunciation here, Rinpoche say, "Renunciation
is very important because it makes our heart more soft, kind and practical. With a softer
heart you naturally begin to feel more appreciation and respect. Life isn't only full of hardships,
like running bulls all the time." Renunciation, like all the preciousness of this experience
now, of these sense doors working, of this world, of this air, of the Dharma here, of
my friends and family. And it's all impermanent. And the day, I mean, it's going to go by and
I'm going to look back and be like, "It went so fast." And then what can I do now? Will
cause condition and effect, karma. Be in a state of love and kindness now and it'll lead
to that state of mind in the future. Avoid negative states that make me more tense, more
allergic, like more reactive, more harsh. Just don't do that as much. And why? Because
that's samsara. That's samsaric mind. It's not connecting to my nature or the nature
in others, the goodness nature, the Buddha Dharma, and like the Buddha nature in oneself
and others, it's connecting instead to the crusty duality habits. Just these mistaken
perceptions, these very limited kind of ways that cause us to feel so unsettled, so irritated,
so restless. Although like prickly aspects of experience, then that's just samsaric mind.
So instead we're trying to really, before our mind does that, before it gets so kind
of severe, but it's soften, like connect to that inner bravery, which is so vast, it's
so open. It doesn't have a territory to defend. Everyone is always, everyone's already the
best friend. We're not just, we're not saying I want to help this person, not that person.
We're trying to just really be like a quantumist, even really be in a pervasive unconditioned
nature. Again, this is ultimate refuge to be in that nature. So kind of, this is just
like in one way a little bit of rambling about kind of the importance of trying to be settled.
And we have this, this is so rare. I'm in many different circles, right, as a human
being and we all are. I'm in one, I happen to be in one circle, which is this circle,
the Buddhist one. And I'm in other non-Buddhist circles. You know why? Because there's so
many sentient beings and they're not all card-carrying Buddhists. They have Buddha nature. I love
them. But you know what, so many of the non-Buddhist circles I'm in, they're really looking for
a path, something that's reliable. And they're really so intelligent and they're really looking,
they're like hungry for wisdom, right? There's a thing nowadays people call wisdom famine.
And as Buddhists, we don't have that problem. That's not really a challenge for us. Buddha's
been talking about prajna, a wisdom, for thousands of years. There's millions of Buddhists. There's
always wisdom and compassion. What is wisdom? Study, contemplation, meditation. There's,
oh, Buddhists talk about wisdom so much, so much. Prajna Paramita, it's just the perfection
of wisdom is like the main thing. We're really so fortunate as Buddhists. And I'm not saying
that's why other people are not good or something like that. But it's a different situation.
A lot of people are really looking for a path to wisdom and compassion. And as Buddhists,
we already have it. It doesn't mean that's the path everyone should have. I'm definitely
not saying that. But we have a path that will lead to full awakening of ourselves and all
beings. It's already complete. There's all these practices, the eightfold noble path,
the four mind turnings, the four noble truths, the four boundless, recognizing the 12 links.
Looking at the three, all the six paramitas and unpacking the three caiyas into the five
caiyas and the 25 wisdoms. And we have all so much dharma, so much wisdom. We're not
to, there's one way, oh, it's just there for us. We're not having to figure out the fundamentals.
The Buddha taught these. There's like literal like libraries of books of these teachings.
And that way we're so fortunate, so fortunate. So to go for refuge. And this is refuge in
a sense that this is not a sectarian thing. This is talking about wisdom, love and compassion.
These are just natural qualities of awareness. This is not a Buddhist tradition thing. For
my mind, kind of going according to these words and these specific methods and these
specific avenues of like exploration and inquiry, contemplation, opening, revelation, revealing,
like insight, like they work for my mind. I love them. Buddha dharma is really extraordinary.
And we should really kind of genuine, like kind of activate that kind of connection and
the commitment, like that freshness. Because it's so easy to forget. It's so easy to just
keep, look out, forget the special, kind of all the special things we have in our favor,
specifically including Buddha dharma and even more in our own Buddha nature, the Buddha
nature of those beings around us. And the one way, a main way to do that, which we can
do every day is really go for refuge, which we do in every single practice is Tibetan
Buddhists as Theravada Buddhists, as Mahayana Buddhists, always refuge. So there's so many
things to say. And then a simple thing that Venerable Kempa Ramachai emphasizes so much
is a three noble ones. Noble beginning, noble middle, noble conclusion. And the noble, each
of these sections, these three have two parts. The noble beginning is always refuge and bhorechitta
.
So we did that earlier. It's called in this way, it's called renunciation and bhorechitta.
Then the noble middle or the main part of a practice is always some in some ways talked
about differently, shamatha and vipassana, kind of a concentration and insight practice.
In Tibetan Buddhism, that's called kram, zogram, or creation, completion. There's always the
mind calmly abiding, settling, and then the awareness itself recognizing how it is naturally
and being that way, being natural. There's always these two parts of a main practice.
So we could say, shamatha, vipassana, or concentration and insight. That's the noble middle. And
the noble conclusion is always dedicating the merit, the positive virtue or energy, the
goodness that just came, kind of was arisen and activated and displayed, that dedicating
it for the enlightenment of every single being. With the genuine, kind of really genuine heartfelt
care and concern, may this merit become the exact condition, the path, the supportive
condition that will help every single mind throughout all the universe. May it connect
up with each and every mind exactly in the perfect way to help that mind and that heart
just open and flourish and have its own nature come out even more brightly until it's all
illumined, 100% bright, fully awakened. And then secondly, the aspiration. If I'm not
enlightened now, which I'm definitely not, then we have to aspire to have more of that
nature come out. So we make these aspiration prayers, that even if my virtue is teeny tiny
from the practice, that I'm aspiring for it to be immense, infinite. I'm aspiring for
my capacities to become infinite. All these qualities of serving the teachings and beings
to become infinite. And there's so many prayers that have been recited by lineage masters
over the centuries. And then we're just following in their footsteps, reciting their prayers,
kind of like connecting to that infinite quality of our own Buddha nature, and like more activating
it, expanding it, basically stretching it, or kind of, we could once say, just like releasing
this temporary kind of contraction that's holding it back. We're aspiring and kind
of connecting to how it is much more vast and pervasive than we usually are kind of
allow for ourselves to be so amazing. We let ourselves be that amazing, aspire really big.
So always these three noble ones. This in one way includes the whole path of Buddhism.
Refuge and bodhicitta into samatan vipassana, concluded with dedication and aspiration prayers.
So this is to say refuge is really essential. And I haven't really said anything specifically
about refuge. This is all just kind of general, like me highlighting how special refuge is.
The rare and supreme qualities of refuge, which are just galactically, like cosmically amazing
when you really look at these qualities. Like this, really the six rare and supreme qualities
of the of the jewel, the three jewels. They're extraordinary. And they're 100% reliable in
all cases, in all times, for all genders, and all classes, and all races, and all epics.
We will always be reliable because the nature's pervasive. And the compassion, like the compassion
that comes from this nature, is 100% flexible and reflects whatever is helpful in a situation.
It tunes into the exact things in a situation. It has that much love and skill. That's our
own Buddha nature is that powerful. And that's what Buddhism does. That's what the Dharma
does in general. It'll just flexibly adapt to whatever supports beings to be free of
suffering in that specific context. It's how amazing. So here, we're just kind of trying
to really kind of reactivate some of this connection, not require always a new thing,
some new amazing, shocking Dharma thing. Because if we just get in the habit of always needing
the Dharma to wake us up, or the teacher to wake us up, or the world to wake us up, then
we really have it backwards. And it's going to be an end big disappointment. Because we're
the ones that need to wake up. We have to wake ourselves up. And we need help. We can
ask for help. And there's so many things that will help us in Buddhism and in the world.
We should really pursue those. We should be helpful to others too. But in the end, I really
do have to turn these qualities on in my own heart, in my own mind. And so we have this
nature. We can settle into this nature. Both the really special, flexible qualities, that's
called relative bodhicitta. And then the amazing, unchanging, absolute qualities, the ultimate
refuge, which is called absolute bodhicitta. And that's in a more simple, even more simple
way. It's all everything's bodhicitta, relative and absolute bodhicitta. And that's also why
they call these really most profound teachings, which is just bodhicitta, the single sphere.
Tiglijempo, they said, Tiglijempo is the outer refuge, inner refuge, secret refuge, ultimate
refuge altogether, which they say simply is bodhicitta. That's just a full package of refuge.
So just as an encouragement for ourselves to really take some time to really just connect
with what we already have, who we already are, the teachings we've already received,
and really brighten that, and let ourselves to really deepen our own relationship with
what we already have, and have this depth, this more rich texture of our experience.
That's kind of my own personal encouragement really honestly to myself, and get in a slow
and steady, that I won't always need to have some new thing kind of spark me up. But just
if I regular get in a nice rhythm with the practice I already have, the teachings I've
already connected to, and really honor what I've already received, in one way it kind
of like met me. Now I really have to meet it. It has to go both ways. And so this slow
and steady approach is to let that slow cook, to like really let that refuge open up, let
the bodhicitta open up in my experience. And kind of like it'll come from the inside out.
So thank you, that's just kind of a short, kind of more like a general reflection, refuge.
And now we'll go to Dudrum Tersar and Nundra practice. So again, how amazing that such
teachings exist. This terma revelation of this only is Dudrum Rinpoche. It's like so
extraordinary. And we'll go to that now. We'll begin. It's on page 18. It's the calling
the Lama from afar prayers written by as only as Dudrum Rinpoche, and then we'll go right
into the Dudrum Tersar Nundra practice, and we'll do the whole practice together. Thank
you so much. Thank you, friends. Thank you. Thank you all. Thanks so much. Thank you. Thank
you. It's all good, really. I think I felt like it was just important to kind of come
back to in one way, like these basics, like that is just a reminder to myself, mainly
really, the three jewels are so close. And three roots are so close. Channels and wind
essence elements are so close, the three guys are so close, like our nature is so close.
But it can be that our mind gets in the habit of kind of looking for something so obvious.
And so kind of tangible, in one way, so kind of disruptive, that we get used to just being
in a reactive state. And then we kind of are always looking for what's going to cause us
to react as if that like feels like I'm kind of really here and alive or something. But
this kind of that's just kind of endless cycle of some sorrow. So just kind of that encouraging
for myself really to just don't forget to like care for what's already here, what's
already so close. This nature is always here, like in my mind, my heart is always here.
And Rinpoche said it very succinctly in like a beautiful way in their essential journey
of life and death book. Really simply, on page 58, they said, "The nature of consciousness
is absolute guru Padmasambhava, which doesn't change regardless of circumstances or whatever
we experience. All the bardo visions, together with our conceptions, are the retinue of that
nature. All our experiences are actually the retinue of absolute guru Padmasambhava. No
matter where we look, absolute guru Padmasambhava is always with us. It's our nature and our
beauty. And as Rinpoche said so many times, "If we remain in the pristine openness state
of our nature, everything is the beautiful dynamic mandala of guru Padmasambhava." So
just not wanting to forget that. So thank you. Thank you all. Thank you.
[BLANK_AUDIO]